Welcome to Church History and Theology,
a study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us. Come, lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages.
Our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways. Let's go look into one
of those influences today upon Church
History and Theology.
Well, greetings. Welcome to Church
History and Theology. My name is Timothy
Easley as we jump into yet again another
episode that seeks to understand,
clarify, and even yes, enjoy the story
of our brothers and sisters before us.
Today we have a really fun one. I
enjoyed prepping this lesson probably
more than most because the the aspects
about it really answered to some of the
curiosities that we have regarding the
the rhythm of life of those brothers and
sisters who lived before us and what
their experience in church would be
like. Would it be similar to ours? Would
it be different? And
you know, if you're if you're coming at
it from the perspective of wanting to
see, well, you know, maybe my church is
more like theirs
and so it's better or something along
those lines. I'm going to go ahead and
stifle any of that. That should not be
our preoccupation at all.
Again, I'll remind us we are not
first-century Christians. We're not
second-century Christians. If you're
listening in the 21st century, you are
in the in the exact century that God had
designed you to be in. And we are to be
content with that. We are 21st century
Christians and so we're not to be going
to the past looking to validate
ourselves. We're going to the past to
gain wisdom and to appreciate the
fellowship that God has designed for us
to appreciate. And and I say as we as we
pull up an episode entitled Going to
Church in 100 AD,
there's so much material to work with
and so many things to cover and so many
expectations and presumptions that we
have to work through that we really need
to dive right in. A word on logistics
and sourcing.
I am planning on doing this at the end
of every century.
So for instance, last May I began our
20th century walk-through again with
series two, episode one. And that was
I'm now it's May 1st, so that was nearly
a year ago and we have gone 21 episodes
in discussing all manner of things in
the first century and here at the very
end of that we are working through an
episode on going to church in 100 AD. My
plan at this point is over the next
years whenever I finish a century to do
a capstone episode like this. What would
be the experience on what you and I
colloquially call a Sunday morning
service? What would the going to church
feel like? What would it look like? If
you were to
garner access to a time machine and drop
yourself right back into a church
service, you know, what could you
expect?
And that that answer is complex and it's
fascinating and I think it answers a lot
of the unanswered questions that you get
when going through history. It's really
more of the experience of living there.
I remember when I was going through my
history degree, one of the more
fascinating books to me was a book
called Everyday Life in Ancient
Mesopotamia.
I I loved that book because it told me
so much about things that aren't usually
covered in history textbooks. What would
it be like? I want to be able to
visualize what it is to be there.
And that's kind of what I'm trying to do
with these episodes. I'm doing them more
for selfish reasons. I want to know, you
know, what it's like to go to church in
100 AD and 200 AD and 300 AD and and so
on and so forth. And
it shouldn't surprise you that in these
early centuries are
our information is sporadic and it is
localized and there's a lot of
differences among practices and
diversity of practices based on where
you are,
what you have access to and what
information you would have had in the
year 100. And so what I'm going to do
and I'm going to try to hold to this all
the way through is to
when I'm considering the year 100 AD,
I'm going to use sources that span at
the very earliest to 50 AD and at the
very latest 150 AD. That that pretty
much gives us all of the New Testament,
which is
super helpful.
But it'll give us things like the
Didache and First Clement and
and then the debatable issues of
of Ignatius and then also really very
important Justin Martyr and his
experience.
And so those types of things are all
going to be distilled through this to
try to rebuild what you would expect
going to church in the year 100 AD on a
typical
Sunday. Now
there in lies our first complexity.
Sunday in our culture is nothing like
Sunday in their culture.
In fact, there wouldn't even be an
appreciation for the way what we
separate these days out. The earliest
church and up to
and including well into the second
century the first day of the week
borrowed from the Jewish calendar was
what Christians functioned on and they
functioned on that not only in the count
of the weekdays, but also they
functioned on that with respect to when
it began and that was sundown the night
before.
And so when we're when we're already
talking about this, we we reach all
manner of confusions regarding
alignments and days and frustrations
with that
made even more complex by the fact that
the Roman Empire at the time was not
even working on a 7-day cycle, but a
sort of an 8-day cycle. We'll we'll talk
about this. There's there's so many
complexities that we have to work
through and and so I want to at least
get you to the place of where you can
appreciate the complexity with also
maybe gaining some familiarity with the
experience that you would have and maybe
some of the practices that would be
different than things you would
experience in church today.
And that kind of brings us to the point.
There are several branches of the church
that try to put forward that they are
the ancient church or they are the
church of 2,000 years and you know,
their practice while it has changed in
maybe appearance and whatnot is is the
same as the first century church.
There is no church that looks the same
as the first century church. We are all
different. We have all reached different
not only cultures and geographic
locations, we have reached different
places in time.
And we have different technology
abilities, different traveling
abilities. We can attend a church 30
minutes away from our home. There was
simply no or excuse me, 30 miles from
our home. There was simply no way for
people in the first century to do that.
And so the people that you interacted
with that were Christians in the
marketplace were likely the same
Christians that you would have
experienced in your gathering as well.
And so it was far more localized. It was
far more specific to the people that
would have been living immediately
around you. And so with with traveling
the way it is today, that's not the
case. That's not the case even in
diocese today, even in the more tightly
controlled
denominations of Christianity.
But let's go down to try to do this
because again
there's no there's no real blanket
statement that you can say. There's no
one way that all Christians did
everything. They they did not have a set
liturgy. They did not have a set order
of service. There was not some, you
know, everyone speaks in tongues or
nobody does by the year 100. There's
there's all manner of nuance to be had
for this. Those types of things are
still written about as happening. And so
what I'm aiming to give you is what I
wanted to construct as a random church
gathering that you and I can just go and
settle into and kind of experience.
There's going to be things missing that
are present in other churches somewhere
in the world and there's going to be
things present here that weren't
available at other churches in the world
at the time. And those things are
important for us to grasp as
as a unique thing that changes based on
locale at this point in history. Most
importantly, you're going to find that
their familiarity with what was in the
New Testament will vary across regions,
even the way they celebrate Eucharist,
even the way that they celebrate
baptism. So let's delve into this. It's
it's it's been a real trip preparing
this one and I'm looking forward to
sharing with you. So let's get into
this.
Do we
have the expectation that they gather on
Sunday morning?
Yes, I suppose we do.
Is that what happened?
Sometimes yes and sometimes no.
Again, the first day of the week for
Christians in the first century and the
year 100 would have begun at sundown the
night before.
And so the first day of the week goes
from sundown on what we would call
Saturday night and extend all the way to
sundown on what we would call Sunday
night.
And so their gathering
would typically be
not typically, it would be at night
time. It would be while it is not light.
And so there are some locales that would
gather what we would call Saturday
night, but for them is still the first
day of the week.
And then there's others that would meet
before dawn for a couple hours before
dawn and getting up at 3:00, 4:00 a.m.
as we would call it and come and gather
together and and celebrate all of this
and and worship and read the scriptures
and all these things.
Those gatherings
sometimes spanned the entire night.
You can understand the difficulties that
would come to that. In fact, we have an
instance of one of those expressed in
the book of Acts, one that spanned the
entire night on the first day of the
week. And if you've never seen this, I
want you to see it. It's in Acts chapter
20.
And again, we have this cultural
breakdown when we read Acts chapter 20
verses 7 through 11, perhaps we have the
expectation that when we read that on
the first day of the week, they gathered
to break bread
that that that means that this is
occurring on Sunday in the evening time.
I remember there there were here in this
passage here in Acts chapter 20.
Uh there were many lamps in the upper
room where they were gathered again cuz
it was night and a young man named
Eutychus was sitting at the window and
sank into a deep sleep as Paul talked
still longer.
And being overcome by sleep, he fell
down from the third story window and was
taken up dead.
But Paul went down and bent over him and
taking him in his arms said, "Do not be
alarmed for his life is in him."
And when Paul had gone up and had broken
bread and eaten, he conversed with them
a long while until daybreak and so
departed.
Now,
that's a fascinating passage and this
this prolonging his his speech and his
encouragements to them until midnight,
the fact that they're breaking bread,
this is a church gathering.
Uh and so it is the first day of the
week. This would make this a late Sunday
night into Sunday morning as we would
call it. But for them, this is the first
day of the week.
And so for the expressions of this, we
automatically come into the difficulties
of if we come at it from our
perspective, we go, "Oh, this is a
Sunday night gathering going into Monday
morning." But for them, no. This is the
gathering together to break bread on
what we would call Saturday night and
then prolonging his speaking to them and
encouragements of them in the gathering
to them, not really a church service so
much as
a gathering together.
And of course, sleep would be the first
thing that comes to your mind. How on
earth do you function like this? Because
on what we would call Saturday, the last
day of the week for them and on the
first day of the week,
unless you happen to fall onto the Roman
concept of the uh of the weekend such as
it was, it really wasn't like that, but
on their 8-day rotation, uh you've got
to work days both of those days.
And so this night time between Saturday
and Sunday is the time that you meet,
whether it's in the evening or whether
it's in the morning, really depends on
your locale.
There are some, as we see here, that met
both. There are some that meet into the
evening and then go home to sleep and
come back and meet in the morning again
before going off. There's others that
just meet in the morning early to
commemorate specifically the
resurrection of Christ, which again took
place before dawn. And so this was seen
as one of the responsibilities of the
church, one of the privileges of the
gathering, to gather together in
commemoration of the resurrection of
Christ before it was daylight.
And that fit in with their work schedule
as well.
You would come together and and gather
together before dawn.
Uh and boy, if the if the Roman 8-day
rotation,
um by the way, if you want to look that
up, it's called Nundinae.
Uh n u n d i n a e
The 7-day week in the Roman Empire was
not a thing until the 4th century. And
so uh the 8-day rotation um at least in
the 1st century was kind of the more
order of it, but it wasn't really a
a week per se as you know, as we would
think of it. It was a little bit
different, but neither here nor there.
Um obviously, you can see the Jewish
influence in the 1st century church
being uh that we commemorate these
things on the first day of the week,
especially built around the resurrection
of Christ because this is their main
proclamation. This is what their witness
is of.
And so that's really the timing of it.
It's not good Sunday morning to you.
It's it's it's good first day of the
week and it's night time. And so the the
the expression of this is is not that
this is a convenient time to gather, but
that this is an important time to gather
and they sacrifice sleep to come
together.
I cannot imagine if you tried to plant a
church today that that met at 4:00 a.m.
in our culture, how that would
how that would go off.
Uh you know, there's things that get
close. There's like, you know, midnight
vigils or uh midnight masses and things
like this, especially during like Good
Friday or Holy Saturday and things like
this, but they are always the exception.
They're never the rule.
Uh we we just simply don't have the need
for that in the world in which we live.
And that's one of the things I like to
point out as we go through these is we
don't meet like this.
We don't have habits like this. We
aren't in the situations that they are.
They weren't meeting at night for fear
of persecution. They were meeting at
night for cultural reasons. They
couldn't meet during the day. You cannot
just not go to work.
Right? You cannot just as a slave not
show up.
And so you have to set a time at which
everyone can gather together and for
them, that was
in the middle of the night.
Whether it was before daybreak or it was
late night
on Saturday, the first day of the week.
Um you know, again, after after uh
sundown, that's when first day of the
week starts and they were working on
that Jewish calendar like that.
So we see those references throughout
the New Testament. That is on the first
day of the week, right? You see that
again not only in what we just read in
Acts chapter 20, but you see it in 1
Corinthians 16
verse two where uh he expresses that on
the first day of the week, each of you
is to put something aside to store it up
as he may prosper so that there may be a
uh there there will be no collecting
when I come.
That kind of thing just builds back upon
the reality that all of the gatherings
there that they expressed had to do with
the first day of the week.
That is something again that comes out
of the Jewish calendar and references
this from sundown Saturday to sundown
Sunday.
Again,
the church began as Jewish and its
habits were Jewish and its worship
practices were highly informed by Jewish
practices. The idea of gathering
together, having you still have the same
scriptures for crying out loud, you
know? So
there
the Romans with good reason had a hard
time discerning between Jews and
Christians. It made it very difficult
for them.
You'll almost have the same book. You
you you talk about a Messiah, which is a
Jewish concept. You you still meet
together like this. You still count your
days the same way as the Jews do and it
separates you out from Roman society on
the whole. And this was really one of
the issues that settled in for the Roman
concept of of Christians living in their
kingdom. And when we get into the
persecutions of the 2nd century, you're
going to start seeing that that
that separation culturally
really is what drove the Roman Empire to
see Christians as as a threat to the
political order. Not as a direct threat,
but as ones who if they are pacifist,
for instance, or if they don't have to
follow the same patterns that we live in
in the same
things, then are they even to be
considered safe for the Roman Empire or
even helpful?
All of this to say that the first day of
the week and the concept of the first
day of the week is something that comes
directly from the resurrection of
Christ. Christians did not meet on the
last day of the week like Jews did. They
met on the first day of the week and we
see this in the Didache.
Um we see this um as well in the New
Testament. The Didache makes this clear
uh in chapter 14
by saying it specifically that the
Lord's Day, um again, referring to
the first day of the week, uh but every
Lord's Day, gather yourselves together,
break bread, and give thanksgiving after
having confessed your transgressions
that your sacrifice may be pure.
But let no one who is at odds with his
fellow come together, etc. etc., right?
That that reference to the Lord's Day is
unequivocally and undeniably a reference
to the first day of the week. This is
the day that the Lord rose from the
dead.
In all of these instances, we may get a
sense to it. Maybe perhaps they gathered
together in a way that was familiar. It
was just in a different time frame,
right? But the locale is completely
different as well.
And because of that, we we express how
exactly this looked is something quite
different than what we experience now.
I have seen people try to argue that
church buildings or at least something
of the sort was present in the early
church, and this is simply not the case.
There were no dedicated church
buildings. There were no
um
sacred spaces like that for Christians
in any way that's meaningful whatsoever.
The church was the church wherever it
gathered.
And when it gathered, it was the church.
And when it wasn't gathered, it looked
forward to the next gathering. And they
were they were sought to
uh take these ideals, these virtues,
these commands of Christ, these
teachings of scripture into their lives
throughout the week and then come back
together on the first day of the week,
the Lord's Day,
and
again, hear from the word of God, pray
to Christ,
uh sing hymns, all of these things.
Their worship was built out of who they
were.
And as we uh delve into this, we start
to see that most of this is told in the
New Testament, and we kind of read it in
passing, but don't quite uh address it.
That there's that there's while there's
not set church buildings,
uh there are places that individual
gatherings met every week.
But it wasn't a dedicated building for
that ends. No, it was
it was the home of one of the members.
Likely it would have been one of the
more wealthy members that had space uh
in which for people to meet. It wouldn't
have been, you know, it wouldn't have
been a slave of the church uh or a slave
that meets in the church or uh or any of
these types of things. This would have
been a wealthier
um patron of the church that
has the gathering is sponsored in their
house. And if there's traveling
preachers or visiting missionaries or
whatever the case may be, they would
house them and have them there. But
houses like this
uh by and large would be able to have
maybe
a a few dozen at most people gathering.
You are not talking about mega churches.
You are not talking about over 100
people or anything like that. It was
very unusual that we saw on the day of
Pentecost that 120 people were gathered
in an upper room. That would have been
absolutely packed.
Uh or it would have been an absolutely
unusual house. But 120 people in a
single room would have been I mean,
imagine that in some of our houses, even
if you have a larger house. That's a lot
of people.
That would have been standing room only
type stuff. And so
for the vast, vast majority of
gatherings, uh except outside of
gatherings in the temple uh early on in
the first century, we are talking about
church gatherings of several dozen at
best.
Most of them probably three dozen or so.
So you're talking about what would be
considered a small church today.
Right?
And as we as we delve into that, we can
see that this occurs from the very
beginning in the New Testament. You see
in Acts chapter 12,
when he realized this, uh this is Acts
chapter 12 verse 12. When he realized
this, he went to the house of Mary, the
mother of John,
whose other name was Mark, where many
were gathered together and were praying.
This is one of those instances in the
book of Acts where that happens. But as
we see the book of Acts in the very
beginning portions of the age of the
apostles, we see that in the letters of
the apostles, especially that of Paul,
he references in his greetings uh these
house churches that are commonplace.
Uh you see at the end of Colossians
chapter 4,
uh give my greetings to the brothers at
Laodicea and to Nympha and the church in
her house.
You see it in the same in the greetings
in the book of Romans, Romans chapter 16
verses 3 to 5.
Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow
workers in Christ Jesus, who risked
their necks for my life, to whom not
only I give thanks, but also the
churches of the Gentiles give thanks as
well.
Greet also the church in their house.
Greet my beloved Epaenetus, uh
who was the first convert to Christ in
Asia.
He says the same thing to Philemon when
he's speaking to him about Onesimus,
where he expresses his greetings to
Philemon
uh and Apphia, our sister, and
Archippus, our fellow soldier, and the
church in your house.
Those references
express to us that the places that
Christians gathered, without exception
outside of the book of Acts, and in the
book of Acts you do have the very, very
first churches gathering in Jerusalem in
the temple.
Outside of that, the norm throughout the
world is that Christians were gathering
in homes.
And this this led to a
a
way to attempt
to bridge all of this throughout them.
Actually, it was one of the things that
gave rise to a position called bishop uh
later on in the 2nd century. But here in
the 100 AD, you're looking at a far more
simplistic structure going on here. of
all of these things. And I would say
something that is not just reminiscent
of the New Testament, but is actually
born out of the New Testament.
Their entire structure, their entire
gathering is expressed as something of
sacrifice.
Something that we
probably don't talk about in these terms
that we ought to.
Usually, if you are uh
you are in more liturgical
denominations, you would speak of
sacrifices probably only in relation to
the Eucharist, which is not how they
spoke. Uh not in 100 AD.
How they spoke was very similar to the
New Testament.
Every aspect of worship is sacrifice. By
the way, that's also how the Old
Testament speaks. Sacrifice was not only
about the guilt offerings or the sin
offerings or the blood offerings or the
whole burnt offerings or whatever. It
sacrifice was about all manner of
things.
Watch this.
In the book of Hebrews chapter 13 verse
15,
praise,
singing to God, praising to God is
sacrifice.
In Philippians chapter 4 verse 18,
we see almsgiving expressed as
sacrifice.
In Philippians chapter 2 verse 17,
we see our suffering as Christians
spelled out as sacrifice.
And going back to that same passage in
Hebrews 13, we see that good works
generally and generosity
are both spelled out as sacrifice.
In fact, Romans 12 will make very clear
to us that the entire Christian life is
to be seen as an extension of sacrifice.
Where the apostle pleads with us to
present our bodies as living sacrifices,
holy and acceptable to God, which is
your
reasonable worship, your spiritual
worship.
So when the Christians all gather
together, it should not surprise us that
terms like sacrifice are used of their
worship. The New Testament has done this
many, many times.
In fact, one of the main
pictures of the church is that of the
temple of the Holy Spirit, something
that
people usually apply only to the
individual, but that's not
the point. The point is not that the
individual is the temple of the Holy
Spirit. It is that the church uh in
fact, if you go back to that passage in
1 Corinthians chapter 6, you'll see that
the plural you is used there, y'all from
where I'm from.
Uh
y'all are the temple of the Holy Spirit.
Don't you know this?
Y'all's body, the gathering.
Look at how 1 Peter chapter 2 says this,
verses 4 to 5. Just listen to this.
As you come to him, a living stone
rejected by men, but in the sight of God
chosen and precious,
you yourselves, like living stones, are
being built up as a spiritual house to
be a holy priesthood
to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable
to God through Jesus Christ.
Here Peter speaks of the church as a
building, as a temple.
Each of us as living stones, Christ
himself the cornerstone, even giving
pictures of the prophets and the
apostles to combine this with Paul's
vision of this same temple.
Uh the the foundation stones of the
prophets and the apostles, uh different
runs of stones going either direction,
and then all of us being built up,
mortared in by the grace of God as
living stones in this temple that God is
building throughout space and time.
Inside that gathering,
in whatever century and in whatever
continent we live,
we offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable
to God. Sacrifices of praise, of
generosity, of works, of thanksgiving.
This is the Christian life.
And when we gather together, it should
not surprise us when we read in the
Didache that it says things just like
this. When we gather together on the
Lord's Day
and break bread and give Thanksgiving
after we have confessed our
transgressions that our sacrifice may be
pure.
We should do this in clear conscience.
We should do this as often as we gather
together and we should do this without
hesitation. There were those even as the
New Testament is being written that look
at the gathering and say, "Ah, what need
have I of gathering together with other
I've got the Christian life set by
myself." Or the gathering is not as I
experience it or it's it's something
different than what I grew up with. Say
if I grew up in Antioch and then I moved
to Philippi.
Well, the churches in Philippi aren't
doing things the same way as the
churches in Antioch. Therefore, I don't
have to gather with them and and many
such
logistics people have decided their
lives with and we are warned not to do
that but instead to gather together. We
are in need of one another.
This is one of the reasons why I teach
church history as an extension of
fellowship because we are to know those
things that have gone on before us. We
are to know those people who have gone
on before us that we may even gather
with them while not in time and in
space, in spirit and in truth.
When you settle down, if you grabbed a
time machine and settle down in the year
100 and then just walked up to a random
gathering of Christians, what would you
see? What elements would be there?
It's a curious question because I find
that many churches pride themselves on
their liturgy or lack thereof, which is
also a form of liturgy.
Uh
many churches pride themselves on their
local liturgical habits. Uh I myself uh
think highly of uh the liturgy I take
part in every week, but
to to make that uh a rule for everybody
is really where we get into trouble.
And so because as we delve back into the
history, we realize that really nobody
in the first century is looking like any
one of us. It's different. It's
different every time we see it. And when
we see in the year 200, you're going to
see it different again. And in the year
300, you're going to see it different
again.
And definitely in 400 and beyond, my
goodness.
Uh and it will change and change and
morph all the way through history. And
here's the thing.
A church gathering in the year 2200 and
2700 is going to look different than
yours today, too.
That's okay.
But there is
in every one of them that is Christian
similar elements of worship. And maybe I
can encourage us to that end. What
things in here do we find are
straight-up biblical and other ones that
are just straight-up practical?
Such as for instance, the gathering
together
either at night time or in the early wee
hours of the morning at dawn on the
first day of the week.
Which one?
You're going to find churches doing both
one or the other.
Does that mean one is wrong?
That mean the other one's right? That
mean they're both wrong and they should
all come together at 10:30 a.m. after a
Sunday school hour like us?
No.
It means that times, practicality,
culture, even sometimes persecution make
these things
difficult.
And so you have to respond to them. You
have to interact with them.
In short, what would it look like?
Well, if we settled into a typical one,
I would say it would be more like this.
The gathering would be like this. You
and perhaps two or three dozen other
Christians
all from various social strata meeting
in a private home
likely of one of the wealthier members
of the church that provides this free of
charge.
Men,
women,
slaves,
freemen,
a cloth maker,
a traveling preacher who, by the way,
has a copy of one of Paul's letters.
And he gets to read it out.
When you gather together, prayers are
offered.
There are prayers that come from the
scriptures. The Lord's Prayer is
certainly part of this.
In fact, we have reference at this time
period that Christians were encouraged
to actually say this even when they
weren't in a gathering together
on their own three times a day.
Order in these gatherings would have
been maintained by the elders there and
deacons should they
be a part of that local assembly if they
had enough people that arranging things
was necessary.
Elders and deacons were not some
clergy class of vocational ministers
primarily.
Most of the time, they were a mature,
trusted member of the church
uh that all agreed should play the role
of an overseer.
They would have been ordained to that
end
and installed by the church by common
agreement.
Primarily, they would have seen the
scriptures as paramount. The reading of
the scriptures,
the gospels, whatever they had.
Let's say the one you settle down in
would have had um a a copy of the Old
Testament scriptures almost certainly in
Greek uh
and likely would have had access to
something like Matthew and Luke.
And if you have access to Luke, likely
that's traveling around at this point in
history uh with the Book of Acts
uh and possibly several other epistles.
And the one you settle in also happens
to have a copy of the Book of Revelation
which is one of those books that is
really odd in the fact that more people
knew of its status as scripture in the
first century than at the turn between
the second and third century, which is
really remarkable. It fell out of favor
and then um
had to claw its way back.
Other writings could have been read as
well so long as they were helpful for
edification.
Uh encouragements from other churches,
letters from other churches, uh other uh
epistles that were floating around the
churches as well. Uh if they were
helpful for edification, they could have
been read as well.
There would have been confessing of sins
to each other.
There would have been a clarifying and
admonishment of one another and edifying
of one another to imitate the things of
of Christ, to actually follow the
commands of Christ. It would have been a
much more communal atmosphere than
something I think that either myself or
most of you would have been familiar
with.
Almsgivings uh were a part of worship as
well, especially for more wealthy
Christians, uh the collections for poor
saints specifically that were in need.
And that would extend not only to those
that were gathered together there, but
for churches that were in need outside
of that specific locale. If you knew of
a church that uh or a gathering of
Christians
uh that was in say uh Laodicea
and they were dealing with a horrible
series of storms that came through and
took out all their crops. They're going
to need help. And so funds would have
been sent to the support of the saints
there.
When you're
gathering together here, you're also
singing songs.
New hymns were being written all the
time.
Uh you actually have references that
Pliny makes
uh who is an early church historian and
he writes about Christians that they
meet before dawn and sing hymns to
Christ as to God.
We see the very earliest evidences of
this in Philippians chapter 2, verses 4
through 11, what is called the Carmen
Christi. Uh a a poetic set aside that
looks like one of the earliest hymns of
the church.
Not only that, they would have sung the
Psalms. Again, the amount of Jewish
influence on the liturgy of the early
church is significant. Uh when they
meet, the way that they met, even going
from house to house. They're not
established like synagogues here. Uh
if if they had access to the synagogue,
that would have been unusual, but this
would have been from house to house as
they continue out into the world.
The singing of Psalms would have been
part of their life. Uh we see that
reference even in the New Testament. Uh
and spiritual songs as well. This would
have been uh somebody's unique
composition.
Uh
things that are still part of today. Uh
an encouragement for the church, uh a a
song uh to sing or or something to share
uh and that we even see come up in 1
Corinthians chapter 14
uh where
where when they come together
uh you know, what is that? Verse 26,
where
uh when you come together, each of you
has a hymn, maybe a word of instruction,
a revelation, a tongue or an
interpretation, but everything must be
done so that the church is to be built
up. You know, whether you speak in
tongues or whether you offer hymns.
This relationship to music,
this relationship to song, uh to Psalms,
to even spiritual songs all for the
edification of the church.
And that's the thing. because it is used
in a church service does not mean it is
inspired.
Right? Now, the Psalms were inspired.
Are these hymns? No.
The Carmen Christi is because it's in
Philippians 2.
But, as we as we peel out all of this,
just because something is read in church
does not mean it's scripture.
And just because something is sung in
church does not make it
liturgically necessary.
But, Psalms, hymns, spiritual songs,
these were the habits of a church in the
year 100.
It wouldn't have just been the reading
of the scriptures, it would have been
the expounding of them, the teaching of
them, what these things mean, and the
encouragement of people to imitate this.
We see this from Justin Martyr
explaining that their habit was to read
from the Old Testament scriptures and
from the memoirs of the apostles, uh
which is shorthand for the Gospels, uh
something by the way, very very early
on, the four Gospels were recognized and
passed around as scripture like that. Uh
as well as any of the writings of the
apostles.
But, Justin Martyr makes clear that they
would read these things as long as time
permits, which means there wasn't a set
time for the uh for the gathering as
well.
Uh the set time was when the sun rises,
which would make sense that even in his
locale, even in the year 150, we're not
looking at set everything. We're still
looking at local
distinctions, local
dis um local specifics that are not the
same everywhere else.
They would not only read the scriptures
and the the Old Testament prophets and
uh the memoirs of the apostles as long
as time permits, but then there would be
a presider over that meeting, uh an
elder that would then uh expound upon
the meaning of these things and
encourage everyone to imitate the good
things that they learned in the
scriptures.
It's a bit different than
uh the sermon concept. It's even
different than the homilies that we uh
see in some more liturgically uh
supposedly historical churches. But, the
first century would have seen a much
more
uh
what's the term for it? A much more
personal,
almost
I dare I say
speaking amongst friends,
how is it that we do this?
Uh type of tone.
Something that is not really taught in
homiletics courses as much as it should
be.
When baptisms were necessary, such as
new converts, they would have been
carried out.
Uh but, as far as for like a set
baptismal or something, there wasn't
anything like that. Some homes would
have had a bath or something like this
where that could have taken place in.
But, largely we see that the evidences
show that the goal is to actually do
this in a river.
Uh to depict the washing away and the
carrying away of sins. Again, the the
concept, the imitation of Christ is
significant. Why do we meet while it's
still dark on the first day of the week?
Because that's when Christ rose from the
dead. Why is it we baptize in running
water? Because that's how Christ was
baptized. Why is it we celebrate the
Eucharist? Because that's what Christ
did.
Why is it we don't do it separate from a
meal as just bread and a cup, but part
of a large meal? Because that's what
Christ did.
Most of us will probably be surprised to
hear that Eucharist in this time was not
something separate from a meal.
There would be a a
a meal called by various terms, love
feast, agape meal, call it whatever you
want, but they would gather together,
they would eat, and and even eat to
their fill. It was it was very much like
a potluck that we would know at church
these days. Uh
everyone would bring food that could
afford to do so, and everyone would
share what they have. Why? Christ did
this. Again, the imitation of Christ is
really the goal here of the liturgy.
And the concept was that out of that
meal, as part of it in this time frame,
you would have bread and wine taken
apart,
said thanks for, break it. Why? Because
that's what Christ did.
And pass it around and give it to
everyone to eat.
I want you to hear this from the
Didache,
chapter 9.
Where they express out here, and this is
again, this would be a concurrent
document describing these things. We did
a whole episode, a resource episode on
the Didache, which if you didn't see, go
see.
Chapter 9 Didache reads this way, the
Eucharist.
Now, concerning the Eucharist, give
thanks this way. Now, again, stop for a
second.
The very term eucharisto
in Greek is just Thanksgiving.
How is it that you do this?
What are we what are we doing at the at
the center of the breaking of bread and
the sharing of the cup? We are thanking
God for Christ.
The Didache says, now concerning the
Eucharist, give thanks this way. First,
concerning the cup. We thank thee, our
Father, for the holy vine of David, thy
servant, which you made'st known to us
through Jesus, thy servant. To thee be
the glory forever.
And concerning the broken bread,
here's the prayer. We thank thee, our
Father,
for the life and knowledge which you
made'st known to us through Jesus, thy
servant.
To thee be the glory forever. Even as
this broken bread was scattered over the
hills and was gathered together and
became one, so let thy church be
gathered together from the ends of the
earth into thy kingdom. For thine is the
glory and the power through Jesus Christ
forever.
Let no one eat or drink of your
Eucharist unless they have been baptized
in the name of the Lord, for concerning
this also the Lord has said, give not
that which is holy to the dogs.
In other words, Eucharist was saved for
baptized members of the gathering
assembly.
Eucharist
here without any of the terms specific
to sacrifice that would be expected
later, or without any of the concepts of
presence and transubstantiation
and consubstantiation and so many other
later
discussions, disagreements, and things
that mm shall we say
caused problems in the church in later
centuries. You don't have that here.
You have Thanksgiving.
You have the comparison to the body of
Christ,
and the continuance of that picture
to the whole church.
That just as the broken pieces of bread
were scattered over the hills, so too is
the church scattered throughout the
world, and we look forward to the day
when Christ will gather together his
elect from all of the earth
into one place in the kingdom of heaven.
Why do we do this?
We do this. Why did they do this? We
They did this because this is an
imitation of Christ.
What did he do? He thanked the Lord.
This blood of a new promise, this this
bread
that is broken
for his people,
this body that is broken for his people.
Christ gave thanks, they sang hymns
in commemoration of this and gave thanks
to God for this new promise made in
Christ's blood.
This is not some
deep
concept of transubstantiation or or real
presence, and I'm not even denying that
people held to real presence or anything
like that. They certainly did. On on
this level, on that level, all sorts of
people had different concepts.
What I am saying though is that in the
observations of the first century that
we have, the focus is on saying thanks
to God for Christ and the promises that
were enacted by his sacrifice.
We even see it in the prayer after
communion in chapter 10 of the Didache.
Again, you can see that this is part of
an entire meal.
After you were filled, give thanks this
way.
We thank thee, O holy Father,
for thy holy name which thou did'st
cause to tabernacle in our hearts, and
for the knowledge and faith and
immortality which you made'st known to
us through Jesus, thy servant. To thee
be glory forever.
Thou, Master Almighty, did'st create all
things for thy name's sake. You gave us
food and drink for to men for enjoyment
that they might give thanks to thee.
But, to us you did'st freely give
spiritual food and drink and life
eternal through thy servant.
Before all things, we thank thee that
you are mighty.
To thee be the glory forever.
Remember, Lord, thy church, deliver it
from all evil and to make it perfect in
thy love, and gather it from the four
winds, sanctified for thy kingdom, which
thou
thou have prepared for it. For thine is
the power and the glory forever. Let
grace come, and let this world pass
away. Hosanna to the God of uh
uh
of David. If anyone is holy, let him
come.
If anyone is not so, let him repent.
Maranatha. Amen.
It is a remarkable thing to even hear a
prayer from this time period
referencing all of this. Again,
the whole point here is the idea that we
truly feed on Christ and are grateful to
him spiritually the same way God has
made food and wine in the world to be
fed upon and
responded to with Thanksgiving.
Christ is our true spiritual food
and our true spiritual drink. Just as we
heard from the very lips of Christ in
his earliest teaching,
we hunger and thirst for his
righteousness.
And in Christ, through faith, we have
had that hunger and that thirst
quenched.
At least for our placement in him,
for our position, for our salvation, and
then therefore
we seek to say thanks over and over and
over again. And it not only does not
grow weary in thanking him, it grows
sweeter with time.
And so when they gathered together, this
is how they celebrated Eucharist.
This is how they celebrated communion.
It would be part of a large meal where
they were all sitting down eating
together as you would a Sunday afternoon
meal or a potluck.
And it would be
in our terms at night time still.
Whether it was a late night meal on the
first day of the week, what we would
call Saturday night, or there would be a
Sunday morning before dawn breakfast.
Whatever it was, when they gathered
together, they would break bread from
house to house. This was not some huge
orderly,
you know, controlled way. This was
almost an extemporaneous
uh
in the first church
ex- expression of their Thanksgiving. As
the years went on, as we come up to the
year 100, it would become more
formalized at a distinct meal.
And it would be a section of that meal.
Uh either at the beginning or in the
middle or at the end, we do not know.
Other aspects of this church meeting in
the year 100 that would stand out to you
is that some of the charismatic gifts of
the first century are still around, even
though they're a little bit rarer these
days than the New Testament days.
Speaking in tongues in
your locale may have vanished, but is
alive and well in other locales.
Maybe there's a guy sitting next to you
at this meeting that um that
uh had been healed from paralysis.
Healings were still going on.
They reported well into the 2nd century.
In fact, many such healings, even of
lesser degrees, of lesser illnesses, are
seen. Exorcisms are still normal.
They're reported all about.
There are dozens of people
throughout the Christian world that have
been risen from the dead. You have to
understand the time frame of what in
which these people are gathering in the
year 100.
People that would have been I mean, we
read of the story of Eutychus back in
Acts chapter 20. Now, some people uh go
back and forth, is he dead or is he not?
Well, yeah.
He fell out the window and
uh he was dead and then risen to life
again. But many who were risen to life
even during the time of the apostles and
in the days after that, those reports
still carried on.
We have indications that that continued
sporadically, but throughout the 2nd
century as well.
While the apostles are dead,
the witness continued to live on in what
they wrote and in what they did just the
generation before this year.
And in the year 100 AD, as you settle
back in that time frame, uh you have
joined what's called the age of
disproof.
There are people alive in the year 100
that saw Jesus when they were children.
The co-workers of the apostles are
everywhere still throughout the church
as a whole.
You are not settling into some unknown
frame of history. You're settling in one
generation after the New Testament.
And life for the Christian looks a
little bit different.
There are those who had died
as martyrs in Nero's persecution.
There are others who in their locale
deal with localized persecutions,
sometimes to the death,
though that's not very typical at this
point.
Sometimes it's bannings.
Uh sometimes it's being kicked out of
town, which, you know, to our modern
ears doesn't sound as bad as it would
for them. That was an upheaval of
livelihood, of family connection, of
everything they ever knew.
And so the church gathering for them
would have been much more important than
for a lot of us, it seems.
For them, it was worth the sacrifice,
no matter what it took to gather
together.
If that meant the sacrifice of sleep or
if that meant the sacrifice of even our
own lives, it's worth it.
There are some misconceptions about this
era of history. People who have kind of
a romanticized version about this, uh
whether like meeting in catacombs or uh
on the run from persecutions. There's
not that much persecution going on in
100 AD.
Uh the reign of Domitian before this, um
there were aspects of it likely, but
most of that has come from a very
different time that is looking back on
it, uh trying to make out of Domitian
something that we don't really have
record for what he was uh with regards
to that. Uh trying to make him like a
second Nero, but that doesn't really
make sense.
Um you really have a much more tolerant
atmosphere
uh with Trajan in the year 110
uh and and or in the years 110 and
following.
Um
there's localized frustration about
Christians, but there's also confusion
about how they're different than Jews uh
and things like this that we will get
into.
Really, you do not see
massive
persecutions until the late 2nd century.
When we get into reigns like Marcus
Aurelius
and then we see others in the 3rd
century massively,
um we will see persecution take off
empire-wide issues that deal with uh
massive persecutions all over the place.
But for this time period,
persecutions
were not taking place in any organized
or broad sense.
Even Nero's persecution was relegated to
the city of Rome and its surrounding
areas areas.
And the idea of uh people holding normal
uh
normal church services in catacombs,
those would be more commemoration
services. They would be unusual. They
would not be the weekly gatherings.
That's that's more of a romantic idea
uh of of like the golden era of the
persecuted church. That That is not the
norm actually at any point in history.
Um as far as for a broad sense.
Um was there a church that did that uh
in one location? Um possibly, yeah. Uh
but as far as for norm, no.
As we kind of close out this episode, I
think one of the great takeaways from
this is to realize that the scriptures
showed us a lot of this.
And that as we have continued throughout
history,
this the core skeleton of all of this
has stuck around
because it came out of scripture. And
that is what the Holy Spirit is working
on the church to do. Prayers, the
reading of scripture, the encouragement
of imitation of Christ, the recognition
of Christ's sacrifice, the saying of
thanks to God for Christ and his
promises. The baptism is the initial
uh initiation practice, if you will. Um
Yeah, and here's the thing.
Are the habits of these and the modes
going to change and morph throughout
history? Yeah, we're going to see
everything change.
Uh is Eucharist anywhere
uh expressed as a part of a large agape
meal in the middle of the night? I've
never seen it. There probably is someone
somewhere that does it. Would I want to
attend that? No.
Not necessarily. Not over one that
happens during the daytime. Uh if it's
the only option, sure.
If you're only doing it because it's a
novel thing once, okay, yeah, sure.
But if you're doing it as like uh you
know, a
like a a a marketing gimmick or
something like this, I don't really have
much respect for that and I don't think
anyone in the 1st century would as well.
If they had the option to meet during
the day, you best believe they would
have.
They expressed a great deal of of um
ability to morph their practices to
match their situations. We even have
multiple modes of baptism described in
the Didache. You know, you you're
ideally looking for a river with running
water, but if you can't do that, at
least do it, you know, in a pool of
water, but you know, cold water instead
of warm. If all you have is warm, I
guess you can work with that, but if you
if you don't have enough water, you
know, pour it. Uh but if you're going to
do that, at least do it three times. The
name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, right? So,
you can already see this adaptability
uh to the mode of things in the 1st
century. You can see it uh throughout
there.
And the uh you see the differences in
it. They wanted fastings before
baptisms.
Uh and yet Justin Martyr in the same uh
in just the next generation doesn't know
anything about that, but does understand
that only those who have come to faith
in Christ are the only ones that are the
subjects of baptism. And so you see
believers baptism is the norm.
Um
Infant baptism comes up at the end of
the 2nd century and you know, we can
debate forever and a day if that's
appropriate or why that's coming up and
the role that infant mortality played in
that's in that innovation.
All of this to say, at the end of the
day
Christ is the one we are imitating.
Christ is the one in whom our faith is.
And that will have direct effects for
what you see the role of scripture is
and the role of those leaders that are
properly ordained and qualified to guide
his church to see and imitate and love
Christ more clearly.
I hope this has been of encouragement to
you. It has been for me. I look forward
to going to church in my 21st century
church this coming Sunday morning at
11:00 a.m. or at 10:30 a.m.
That doesn't mean that if I was jumping
into a time machine, I would not want to
join an all-night service somewhere. I
would.
That sounds fascinating.
But God has made me for the 21st
century. He made them for the 1st
century. They were faithful.
Now let's us be faithful with what God
gave us
and be thankful every day for what he
has provided for us in Christ.
Lord's blessings with you all.